Welcome back. Let's start our journey through the STL design with containers.
Containers are collections of data in some data structure. Like in the vector example,
earlier, containers are templated classes. The type of data they contain is a template
parameter. This creates a limitation: all data in the container have to
be of the same type, we don't have heterogeneous containers, like with Python lists
for example.
While limiting, this is also useful. As we saw earlier, knowing exactly
what a vector contains makes it possible to store it and access it efficiently.
So this is actually good. We can specialise the container for practically any type,
built-in and user-defined. And That includes other containers too. We can have containers
of containers.
Each container class implements a different data structure, so each one has a
different interface and trade-offs. But they also provide a small number
of functions that are common across all containers. This common abstraction is
what allows us to use them through generic code withour caring about the
specific container.
C++ offers three main categories of containers. Sequence containers, associative
containers, and unordered associative containers. We also have two groups of
container-like objects: adaptors and views. Finally we have a group of classes that
are not exactly containers but they kind of contain data. We will examine each group
in more detail soon. Using a container is relatively straightforward, regardless
of the container. So, first you need to include the appropriate header file, which
has the same
name as the container. #include vector for example allows us to use
vectors. Then later in some other part of the code we declare a variable
of type std double-colon vector. std is the standard library namespace, the
scope within all these containers live. vector is just the name of the class.
std::vector means the vector class from the standard library.
All containers are templates, so we have to define the template parameters. In this
case, we define data as a vector of ints. Similarly, we declare other containers,
in this example, here, we have a list and a map. Okay,
all of these containers are useful but I will only go through the
most important ones from each container group. You will not need to use in the exam
any containers I do not discuss.
First, sequence containers store their elements in some short of well defined order
We have vectors, lists, deques, etc. But the most important one is the
vector. This is similar to the vector we defined earlier. It's a variable size array
class and it encapsulates a raw heap array and its size. Like we discussed earlier,
This is similar in functionality to Python lists and Java ArrayLists but far more
efficient. A
pseudo definition is on the right: the class contains a pointer to the heap
array and the size of that array. Its most important vector-specific operations
are these, you construct it as an empty vector, with a certain size, or with a list
of elements. You push_back elements one by one to append them and you access specific
indexes with square brackets, like you would access an array.
You can also access indexes with bounds checking, making sure that the index is valid
and you do that by using at. This is safer but a bit slower. So it depends on your
trade off.
The other important container is array. This is a fixed size array which encapsulates
a raw stack array. The size of the array is a template parameter and it's known
at compile time. Again a pseudo-definition is on the right.
std::array has a similar interface to vector: you can initialise it with a specific
space but otherwise empty, you can initialise it with a specific sequence, you can
use square brackets and you can use at. The major difference, of course, is that you
cannot append data, because the array is fixed size. There are more sequence containers
but unless you *know* that you need something else, you should just
use a vector.
And as a matter of fact, you should use vectors even when you think you need a
raw array. C-like arrays are somewhere between redundant and harmful in modern
C++. Vectors have similar strengths as raw arrays: they provide contiguous storage
the provide direct memory, random access and they have low storage overhead and
low runtime overhead. So vectors can give us the same benefits as C-arrays.
But vectors are safer and better. When using at, they eliminate bounds errors, one of the
most common runtime errors in C. Then, vectors are resizable, they can grow automatically.
They also provide a rich interface to the rest of the library, and of course
they are RAII-compatible. This last bit is critical. When using raw heap
arrays, all of the memory management is manual. We have to do a manual new and a
manual delete. If we forget the delete, or some exception happens and
we skip the delete, then we have a memory leak. This is bad. With vectors, memory management
is automatic. We tell the vector what size we want when we create it and it allocates
it. Then when the vector goes out of scope, the allocated memory is released
We don't have to do anything about memory.
Finally, C arrays have the bad habit of decaying into plain pointers when passed to functions.
In the function fn1, the typing information alone is not enough to tell whether
the argument is an array or a pointer. And if it's an array, we
have no way to find its size, without extra information from
somewhere else. But when we pass a vector to a function, it remains a vector
and its size is still known. This is easier and safer.
There are some corner cases though where a C-array might be slightly more efficient.
vectors are dynamically allocated arrays so they carry the same overheads as raw heap arrays. But
stack arrays, fixed size arrays, might be slightly faster and more efficient. For example,
if we know at compiled time, the size of the array, that enables some compiler optimizations,
that make the code faster. 95% of the time you don't really care though. And even if you
really care, just use the std array which is
also a fixed size stack array but does not suffer from the limitations of C-arrays.
Let's move to the next two groups, the associative containers. These implement set and
map operations, similarly to the set and dict types in python.
The main set-specific operations for set are these: we can create an empty set
or initialise it with some elements, we can insert or erase an element, we can find
it in the set or count how many times it appears. maps have the same
operations but also the square brackets and at operators, which return the
value for the given key. These are really the same operators who had four vectors,
value for the given key. These are really the same operators we had for vectors
but instead of indexes, we give keys.
Both ordered and unordered groups have similar containers with similar
interfaces, what differs is the internal implementation.
Ordered containers basically keep their data in some kind of order internally.
Typically this is done with a search tree. To do that, the data need to be comparable,
which means that their class needs to override the comparison operators. Unordered
containers store their data in some hash map, so they don't need comparison operators
but they do need the data to be hashable. They need the data type to implement a
hash operation.
For random access, unordered containers are usually faster but they do tend to use more
memory, so which one to use depends on your problem.
I will skip adaptors and move straight to Views and the span object. Span is similar
to python slices. It's not a true container, it does not have any data of its own,
but it encapsulates some memory region with container, tells us
where the region begins and where it ends, we can use it like container but the
data will be somewhere else in some other memory. The basic use for spans
is to encapsulate C-arrays.
If for some reason you still want to use C-arrays or more likely you interface with
C code, you can encapsulate the array with a span and then use it safely.
In this example, here we declare a stack array a with five elements and we
convert it into a span s. We can then directly access any element of a through s
but s does not decay into a pointer, carries its size with it, and we can do bounds
checking on it.
Finally we have two utility classes that hold data but are not really containers
tuples and pairs. They're basically quick and dirty ways for creating ad hoc structs.
I am not going to say more though. We will discuss their most important use case next
week.
The C++ containers offer a rich interface which allows us to use them efficiently.
I will not go through all these functions, it would take us ages. And of course you
don't need to remember any of this. Just check the reference manual whenever you
need to use a container. The thing that you need to remember is that some of
these functions are common across all or almost all containers. This is the common
interface of the C++ containers. It's functions retrieving the overall state of
the
container: empty(), size(), max_size(). It's functions adding items: insert and emplace.
It's the erase function which removes a specific item. It's clear which deletes
all data. But most importantly, it's the begin and end functions. These
functions allow us to get the beginning and the end of the container, whatever
that means for each container.
With that information we can then build generic algorithms that can access all
items in the container sequentially, from the beginning of the container to the
end. We will discuss this bit in the next video. To recap, containers are template
classes that encapsulate data organised in some kind of data structure. There
are many different containers but you will only need to use a few of them. Almost
always what you want is a vector.
Vectors make C heap arrays redundant. You get the same performance with cleaner
interfaces and better safety. If you think you need a stack array, you actually want
to use an std::array. If you need a dictionary, you use the map or the unordered map
If you need a set, you use a set or an unordered set.
Spans are not exactly containers but they encapsulate existing memory, for example
C arrays, with container semantics, so you can use them in the library. While its
container has its own interface, they all share a subset of functions that allows
us to use them through generic code. In the next part, we will discuss an important
part of that interface, the handles to the beginning and end of
called iterators, and how exactly
they allow us to use containers generically.